---
title: Selecting Tools
permalink: /test-evaluate/tools/select/
---

{::options toc_levels="2" /}

{::nomarkdown}
{% include_cached toc.html type="start" title="Page Contents" %}
{:/}

-   TOC is created automatically.
{:toc}

{::nomarkdown}
{% include_cached toc.html type="end" %}
{:/}

Introduction {#introduction}
-----------------------------
{:.no_toc}

Web accessibility evaluation tools are software programs or online
services that help determine if a Web site is accessible. This document
highlights different features of evaluation tools which can assist
during evaluation reviews such as the methodologies described in the WAI
resource [Evaluating Web Sites for
Accessibility](http://www.w3.org/WAI/eval/Overview.html).

### What evaluation tools can do {#benefits}

Web accessibility evaluation tools can significantly reduce the time and
effort required to carry out evaluations. When used carefully throughout
the design, implementation, and maintenance phases of Web development,
these tools can assist their users in preventing accessibility barriers,
repairing encountered barriers, and improving the overall quality of Web
sites. The following are ways in which tools can assist users in
evaluating Web sites for accessibility; some tools can perform both:

-   Determine the conformance of Web sites to accessibility checks which
    can be executed automatically;
-   Effectively assist reviewers in performing accessibility checks
    which need to be evaluated manually.

### What evaluation tools can *not* do {#caution}

Many accessibility checks require human judgement and must be evaluated
manually using different techniques. Also, in some cases evaluation
tools are prone to producing false or misleading results such as not
identifying or signal incorrect code. The results from evaluation tools
should not be used to determine conformance levels unless they are
operated by experienced evaluators who understand the capabilities and
limitations of the tools in order to achieve accurate results. Web
accessibility evaluation tools can not *determine* the accessibility of
Web sites; they can only *assist* in doing so.

### Disclaimer {#disclaimer}

WAI encourages the development and evolution of Web accessibility
evaluation tools, and maintains an extensive [list of evaluation, repair
and transformation tools](http://www.w3.org/WAI/ER/existingtools.html).
WAI does not endorse or promote any single tool or vendor.

Considerations for selecting evaluation tools {#considerations}
----------------------------------------------------------------

Web accessibility evaluation tools can be used throughout all stages of
Web site development. For example at the early design stage, Web
designers may be interested in using tools that help them understand how
the site structure, navigation, or look-and-feel perform with respect to
accessibility requirements. Later at the implementation stage,
developers may be more interested in tools that help them assess the
accessibility of the underlying code which is generated by the Web
authoring tools (such as editors or content management systems). Web
content authors, project managers, and other types of Web site
developers have further requirements for evaluation tools that help them
fulfill their respective tasks.

According to the specific organization and Web site for which evaluation
tools will be used, different characteristics and features of Web
accessibility evaluation tools may be more or less important to the tool
users. For example, an organization may choose to use fully automated
evaluation tools which can examine the whole Web site, and additionally
evaluate samples of pages using other types of tools in order to
compensate the limitations of fully automated checking. The following
are some of the factors which may be considered during the selection of
Web accessibility evaluation tools:

### Organizational structure and development process

For larger organizations or when several types of Web developers (such
as designers, programmers, content authors, quality assurance reviewers,
or others) participate in the development of the site, it may be
beneficial to use a combination of evaluation tools in order to balance
the capabilities of the tools, and to address the needs of the different
user roles throughout the development stages.

### Complexity and size of the Web site

Examples of complex Web sites are sites that make heavy use of scripting
to generate Web pages or to provide functionality in them; employ
multimedia content such as audio or video files; incorporate advanced
technologies such as SMIL, SVG, or MathML; or are very large and
difficult to maintain. In such cases, more specialized evaluation tools
might be more useful, even though they may have other limitations.

### Skills and knowledge of the Web developers

Some evaluation tools require users to have more knowledge of
accessibility requirements or markup code (such as HTML, CSS, ...) than
others. Also, some evaluation tools can support Web developers in
learning such skills differently than others. It is important to
identify the intended tool users and their requirements when selecting
appropriate evaluation tools for a specific organization.

### Pre-existing Web development environment

It is often beneficial to deploy evaluation tools that work well with
the existing operating systems and other development infrastructure.
Also, sometimes evaluation tools are plug-in extensions for Web
authoring tools (such as editors, content management system, or save-as
utilities) or browsers; or they can export evaluation reports in
different formats (for example, export results to a database).

Usages of evaluation tools {#usages}
-------------------------------------

Web accessibility evaluation tools can be used for different purposes
depending on the expertise of the users and what checkpoints they want
to evaluate. The following are some of the common characteristics of
evaluation tools to support users fulfil different tasks during an
evaluation process; some tools provide more than one mode of operation:

### Generating reports {#reports}

Report generating evaluation tools are usually designed to evaluate
multiple pages or whole Web sites with little or no user interaction.
The results of the accessibility checks that the tools execute are
summarized in reports which can often be customized according to the
needs of the users. Report generating tools are very useful in quickly
determining the conformance of Web sites to checkpoints which can be
evaluated automatically, and for identifying remaining checkpoints that
need to be evaluated manually.

### Step-by-step evaluations {#wizards}

*Wizard-based* evaluation tools guide users through sequences of checks
step by step. Sometimes these tools are able to execute some of the
accessibility checks automatically and prompt the users to manually
evaluate the remaining checks. For example, an evaluation tool with a
wizard interface may be able to automatically check if the images on a
Web site have text descriptions, then display the images with their
corresponding descriptions to the users to evaluate how appropriate
these descriptions are.

### In-page feedback {#in-page}

In-page feedback evaluation tools insert (temporary) icons and markup
into the code of the Web pages to display the results of automated
accessibility checks and their corresponding location within the pages.
Sometimes, other types of icons are also inserted into the Web pages to
assist the manual evaluation of checkpoints. For example, some tools may
insert icons to indicate the hierarchy of the page headings or lists, or
the reading sequence of table cells that are be perceived by some Web
site users.

### Page transformations {#transformation}

Transformation tools modify the appearence of the Web sites to help
identify conceptual design issues with regard to Web accessibility. For
example, transformation tools may present the content of Web sites in
text only, without color, or read the content aloud. These types of
evaluation tools are usually especially useful to compensate the
limitations of automated accessibility checking and to support the users
in evaluating checkpoints that need to be evaluated manually.

Features of evaluation tools {#features}
-----------------------------------------

The following is a (non-exhaustive) collection of features which may
help users to compare and assess Web accessibility evaluation tools for
their specific needs. Some evaluation tools provide some of these
features with varying adequacy so that carefull analysis needs to be
made when assessing them; sometimes the tool vendors can provide
additional information about how their tools support these or other
features.

### Accessibility: *How accessible is the evaluation tool for people with disabilities?*

It is equally important to ensure that people with disabilities can
    effectively contribute to the Web, as it is for them to be able to
    effectively use the Web. Evaluation tool developers and vendors can
    provide accessibility in all parts of a tool (user interface,
    documentation, or generated reports) by following the [Authoring
    Tool Accessibility Guidelines 1.0](http://www.w3.org/TR/ATAG10/).

### Checkpoint coverage: *Which checkpoints is the evaluation tool able to adequately address?*

While most Web accessibility evaluation tools support a broad
    variety of accessibility checks, some tools focus on specific
    checkpoints that are usually not automatable or require more
    sophisticated methods to evaluate. Also, evaluation tools may have
    varying degrees of accuracy or support the evaluation of the same
    checkpoints in different ways (such as automatically or manually for
    example).

### Configuration: *How well does the evaluation tool adapt to the requirements of the users?*

#### Accessibility checks

For specific Web sites, evaluation tool users may want to
        customize the built-in accessibility checks in order to achieve
        better performance. For example, tool users may want to suppress
        certain automated checks, or to modify the parameters which
        trigger dialogs and prompts that assist users with manual
        checks.

#### Reporting

Evaluation tools that generate reports sometimes provide
        capabilities to customize the format of these reports to
        different degrees. Customizing reports according to the roles of
        the developers (for example content author, programmer, project
        manager, ...) is especially useful for larger development teams.

#### Web site coverage

In some cases, evaluation tools can be configured to examine
        entire groups of related pages (such as department sub-sites,
        pages required to fulfil a specific task on a Web site, ...)
        rather than single Web pages. This feature may also be useful
        for Web site monitoring purposes.

### Integration: *How well does the evaluation tool integrate into the Web development environment of the users?*

#### Platform support

Even though some evaluation tools may be available on more than
        one platform (hardware, operating system, and system
        configuration), they may sometimes not support the same features
        or perform equally on all platforms. It is important to ensure
        that the required tool features are supported on the platform
        where it will be deployed.

#### Software extension

Some evaluation tools integrate into existing development
        environments by providing plug-in interfaces for Web browsers or
        authoring tools (such as editors, content management systems, or
        save-as utilities). This feature may be important to some tool
        users even though such evaluation tools may sometimes be
        constrained by the application they are plugged into.

#### Data export

Some evaluation tools can export evaluation results to databases
        or other types of data processing tools such as analysis or
        reporting tools. Some of the commonly supported data formats
        which facilitate such data exchange are XML or Evaluation and
        Report Language (EARL).

### Policy requirements: *Which guidelines and policy requirements does the evaluation tool support?*

Some evaluation tools provide support for several accessibility
    guidelines and national policy requirements. For organizations that
    are obliged to adhere to one or more national policy requirements,
    it is important that the selected evaluation tools adequately
    support these.

### Reliability: *How reliable are the results delivered by the evaluation tool?*

Inaccurate results such as not detecting accessibility barriers or
    reporting non-existent barriers (that is, false positives or false
    negatives) decrease the reliability of the evaluation tool and hence
    decrease the efficiency of the evaluation. Currently there is no
    widely accepted single method to measure reliability so that careful
    assessments of the performance of evaluation tools with respect to
    the specific type of Web site need to be made.

### Repair: *How well does the evaluation tool assist developers in repairing inaccessible Web sites?*

Even though repair is not part of the evaluation process, it is
    often the next logical step. Evaluation tools can assist developers
    in repairing accessibility barriers and raising the overall quality
    of Web sites by providing in-line repair options, or by providing
    additional information for possible repair measures.

### Web technology support: *How well does the evaluation tool support the relevant Web technologies?*


There several types of Web technologies (such as HTML, XHTML, CSS, …) and often several versions of each. Even though some of the
    more advanced Web technologies such as SMIL, SVG, or MathML are
    currently not widely supported by evaluation tools, it is important
    to select evaluation tools that best address the specific
    implementation of Web sites.

Related pages {#related}
-------------------------

This document is part of a multi-page [Evaluating Web Accessibility
resource suite](tools.md) that outlines different approaches for
evaluating Web accessibility.
